In this video, we're
going to look at
some very exciting new
features that have been
added to Power Query
for Managing columns.
If you have a slightly
older version,
it might not support
these newer features.
We'd encourage you to
watch the video anyway and
then we have another
video called Working
with columns alternate which
will show you how to solve
very similar problems using
alternative features.
In the previous video,
we created a query
to work out how
much we'd spent on
training in June.
What we want to do now is use
that information along with
our training budget data
to work out our total spend for
our second quarter and whether
or not we are over budget.
The first thing we're
going to need to do
is get our training budget data.
This is what it looks like,
but we're going to start off
in our regular Workbook.
Just make sure you're on the
budget sheet, and in A3.
Then we've got to
come to our Data tab,
Get data or new query
from File from Workbook
and you're going to find
the training budget worksheet
and double-click to open that.
The budget data is in a table,
so we're going to
select budget one
and then we're going to
click Transform or Edit.
As you've probably guessed,
we're going to need to
merge this data with
our June's spend query,
but we can't do it
yet because we're
going to need to match
branch and department and
at the moment they're
sitting in a single column
with the cost center code.
The first thing we have to do is
somehow split out this data.
There were actually quite a
lot of options for doing this
and I'd like to show you
some of the newer ones.
Make sure you've got cost
center selected and we're
going to come to the
add column ribbon.
I'm going to show you
my most favorite tool.
This is column from examples.
It's quite new and
it's quite brilliant.
I'm going to click on column from
examples and It's
going to now ask
me to help it by showing it
what data I want to extract.
It's a little bit like
Flash Fill in Excel,
but of course it uses a
query and it's automated.
What I want to do
is I want to get
the branch name but
with a capital letter.
I'm going to type in
Sydney and press Enter.
It's gone and looked
for a patent,
but it hasn't guessed
the right one.
You'll see it says
text before delimiter.
What it thinks I want to do
is split it before I find
an S and that's why I've got
Bri and here it
didn't find any S's.
I haven't given it
quite enough for it
to take the right
pattern, that's okay.
I'm going to click in
the fourth row and I'm
going to type Brisbane.
Now it's worked it out. If you
have a look at the M code,
it's actually saying
split the text
when it transitions
from a lowercase
to uppercase and the second
bit is saying Text.Proper,
that's converting
it to proper case,
in other words, capitalizing
the first letter.
Absolutely brilliant. If I
click okay, there's my column.
That's a great way
of transforming data that's
in a slightly trickier format.
All right. That was one option.
We're not actually
going to use that one.
On the right-hand side,
can you delete that last step
and delete the change
type while we're at it.
Let's have a look at
some other options.
If you wanted to use
something equivalent to
the Left - Right - Mid
functions in Excel,
we have an option called extract.
You'll find this option on
the Add Column ribbon and
on the Transform ribbon,
but they are actually
slightly different.
This group of tools when used
from the Transform ribbon,
will actually transform
the existing column.
In other words, if I extract,
I'll just be left with
the extracted data.
If on the other hand I do it
on the Add column ribbon,
then it will leave
the original column
intact and add another one
with the extracted data.
For this example, that's
the option I want,
so I'm selecting Cost Center.
I'm going to come to Extract
and let's say I want to get
the 5-digit cost center code,
that's the last characters,
so I select last,
type five, and press enter
and there's my cost center.
Another really easy way
of separating data sets.
Again, that's not actually
option we're going to use,
so I'm just going to
remove that step.
Now let's do it for real.
We are going to come to
the Transform ribbon again
and the option we're going
to use is Split Column.
If I click the drop down as
well as the normal options,
there's some really
exciting new ones.
The one we need is
lowercase to uppercase.
This is effectively going
to do exactly what we
did with our first example,
but we're not telling
it what the pattern is.
I'm going to click
my lowercase to
uppercase and you can see it
has split it out
perfectly and all I
need to do is rename this column.
Coming into my M code,
I'm going to select Cost
Center one and call
that Branch and press Enter.
Costs Center two, this column,
I need to split it again.
Let's select It. We're going
to come to Split Column.
This time I want to go
from non-digit to digit.
Again, too easy.
Lets us give those
columns sensible names,
so I'm expanding that.
We'll call Cost Center
2.1 department.
This last one, we'll call
Cost Center Code and press
"Enter" and then I'm just
going to tuck that away again,
and now, we are ready to
merge our two queries.
Coming to our "Home" ribbon,
we're going to find
"Merge Queries" and we
are going to just
change this query.
So we're going to click
on the main part of
the button and it's put my
budget one on the left,
which is great, and if
you click the "Dropdown",
the other query we
need is "Enrollments".
It is a left outer and join.
We actually need to
match two columns,
so I'm going to
select "Branch" and
"Branch" and then holding
my "Control" key,
I'm going to select
"Department" and "Department",
and I'm going to click "Okay".
Remember we need to
expand that out,
so coming to the
Enrollments column,
I'm going to click
the "Expand" button.
I don't want all the columns,
I just want Jun spend and
I don't want it prefixed,
and then click "Okay".
Small problem.
Doesn't seem to have
found any matches.
The reason for that is that
the case for both branch
and department don't match.
Be aware a merge query
is case sensitive.
Somehow I need to
change the case for
these two columns
and I need to do
it before I do the merge.
On the right-hand side,
can you click the step
above the merge queries?
We're then going to
select "Branch",
hold that "Shift" key down
and select "Department" as well.
Then coming to our
Transform ribbon,
we don't want new columns,
we want to keep these
two existing ones,
but we want to change the Format.
So I'm going to select "Format"
and we're going to
capitalize each word.
It's warning us about
the insert step.
That's fine. We're going
to click "Insert".
Columns converted.
If you click back
on your last step,
"Expanded Enrollments", it has
now found the match,
which is great.
You will notice where it didn't
find the match,
it's put the null,
and sometimes we can ignore this,
but I want to do arithmetic now.
I want to add up
April, May and June,
and null does not
behave like a zero.
If I try and add these values,
I'm actually going to
end up with a null.
Here again, I'm going to need
to make a little change,
I'm going to need to replace
all the nulls with zeros.
We'll do it for all three of
these columns just in case.
So from April to June,
we're then going to
come up to "Transform",
we're going to find
"Replace Values",
and we're going to replace nulls
with zero and click "Okay".
We're now ready to add up
our monthly spent to get
our quarterly spend.
For this we're going to
need another new column.
Coming to our "Add column",
we're going to choose "Custom
Column" and custom columns
allow us to do calculations.
So we're going to call this Q2
Spend and in the Formula box,
we're going to double
click "April Spend",
then plus, double-click "May",
plus, double-click "June",
and don't put another
plus or it will error,
and then we'll click "Okay".
We've now got our total spend.
One last thing to do,
and that's to work out if
we've gone over budget.
Now, we could still use
custom column with
an if statement,
but we have a newer and
even easier option called
a conditional column.
We're going to click on
the "Conditional Column",
and what this does is
an if statement for us.
We can't use this
to do arithmetic,
but it's brilliant
for conditions.
We're going to call
this Over Budget
and we're going to
check if our Q2 Spend,
and then for operator we
want is greater than.
Now, I could type a
value in here or,
and this is what we
want, select a "Column".
The column we want is
our Quarterly Budget.
If it is over,
then we actually want
to see the text over.
Now, you could add
another clause and
you can even specify what
to do if it's not true.
If you don't specify
this, it puts a null.
If you click "Okay", you'll
see wherever we've gone over,
and otherwise, we get a null.
That's a completed query.
We now ready to close and load.
Back to our "Home"
ribbon, close and load,
close and load too.
We're going to choose "Existing
Worksheet" and click "Okay".
There's our completed budget.
That completes our section
on power query but
next week we'll look at
some other really exciting
topics with Power Pivot,
the data model and DEX.
Look forward to seeing you there.